[dev2] Configuration files: global.conf (#2955)
conan-io/docs: reference/config_files/global_conf.rst

.. _reference_config_files_global_conf:

global.conf
===========

The **global.conf** file is located in the Conan user home directory, e.g., *[CONAN_HOME]/global.conf*.

Introduction to configuration
-----------------------------

> *global.conf* is aimed to save some core/tools configuration variables that will be used by Conan. For instance:

Reviewer: I think it's worth explaining what's the difference about the core config and the tools config

Author: Yes! Agree 👍

    tools.microsoft.msbuild:max_cpu_count: Argument for the /m when running msvc to build parallel projects
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:verbosity: Verbosity level for MSBuild: 'Quiet', 'Minimal', 'Normal', 'Detailed', 'Diagnostic'
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:vs_version: Defines the IDE version when using the new msvc compiler
    tools.microsoft.msbuilddeps:exclude_code_analysis: Suppress MSBuild code analysis for patterns
    tools.microsoft.msbuildtoolchain:compile_options: Dictionary with MSBuild compiler options
    tools.system.package_manager:mode: Mode for package_manager tools: 'check' or 'install'
    tools.system.package_manager:sudo: Use 'sudo' when invoking the package manager tools in Linux (False by default)
    tools.system.package_manager:sudo_askpass: Use the '-A' argument if using sudo in Linux to invoke the system package manager (False by default)
    tools.system.package_manager:tool: Default package manager tool: 'apt-get', 'yum', 'dnf', 'brew', 'pacman', 'choco', 'zypper', 'pkg' or 'pkgutil'

> .. important::
> 
>     Remember to run that command locally to actually see the latest list because this one may be outdated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I would not warn about this, this list should never be outdated

Tools configurations
--------------------

> Tools and user configurations allows them to be defined both in the *global.conf* file and in profile files. Profile values will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tools and user configurations allow them to be defined both in the *global.conf* file and in profile files. Profile values will
```

have priority over globally defined ones in *global.conf*, and can be defined as:

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: *myprofile*

    [settings]
    ...

    [conf]
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:verbosity=Diagnostic
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:max_cpu_count=2
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:vs_version = 16
    tools.build:jobs=10

Configuration file template
---------------------------

> It is possible to use **jinja2** template engine for *global.conf*. When Conan loads this file, immediately parses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to use **jinja2** template engine for *global.conf*. When Conan loads this file, it immediately parses
```

    :caption: *global.conf*

    # Defining several lists
    user.myconf.build:ldflags=["--flag1 value1"]
    user.myconf.build:cflags=["--flag1 value1"]

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: *myprofile*

    [settings]
    ...

    [conf]
    # Appending values into the existing list
    user.myconf.build:ldflags+=["--flag2 value2"]

    # Unsetting the existing value (it'd be like we define it as an empty value)
    user.myconf.build:cflags=!

    # Prepending values into the existing list
    user.myconf.build:ldflags=+["--prefix prefix-value"]

Running, for instance, :command:`conan install . -pr myprofile`, the configuration output will be something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    ...
    Configuration:
    [settings]
    [options]
    [tool_requires]
    [conf]
    user.myconf.build:cflags=!
    user.myconf.build:ldflags=['--prefix prefix-value', '--flag1 value1', '--flag2 value2']
    ...

Configuration patterns
----------------------

You can use package patterns to apply the configuration in those dependencies which are matching:

.. code-block:: text

    *:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Ninja
    zlib:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Visual Studio 16 2019

> This example shows you how to specify a general `generator` for all your packages, but for `zlib` one. `zlib` is defining
> `Visual Studio 16 2019` as its own generator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example shows you how to specify a general `generator` for all your packages, except for for `zlib`, which is defining
`Visual Studio 16 2019` as its own generator.
```

Author: ```suggestion
This example shows you how to specify a general ``generator`` for all your packages except for `zlib` which is defining
`Visual Studio 16 2019` as its generator.
```

    tools.microsoft.msbuild:vs_version: Defines the IDE version when using the new msvc compiler
    tools.microsoft.msbuilddeps:exclude_code_analysis: Suppress MSBuild code analysis for patterns
    tools.microsoft.msbuildtoolchain:compile_options: Dictionary with MSBuild compiler options
    tools.system.package_manager:mode: Mode for package_manager tools: 'check' or 'install'
    tools.system.package_manager:sudo: Use 'sudo' when invoking the package manager tools in Linux (False by default)
    tools.system.package_manager:sudo_askpass: Use the '-A' argument if using sudo in Linux to invoke the system package manager (False by default)
    tools.system.package_manager:tool: Default package manager tool: 'apt-get', 'yum', 'dnf', 'brew', 'pacman', 'choco', 'zypper', 'pkg' or 'pkgutil'

.. important::

    Remember to run that command locally to actually see the latest list because this one may be outdated.

Tools configurations
--------------------

Tools and user configurations allows them to be defined both in the *global.conf* file and in profile files. Profile values will
have priority over globally defined ones in *global.conf*, and can be defined as:

> .. code-block:: text
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: text
    :caption: profile (not global.conf)

```

    [settings]
    ...

    [conf]
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:verbosity=Diagnostic
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:max_cpu_count=2
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:vs_version = 16
    tools.build:jobs=10

Configuration file template
---------------------------

> Available since: `1.46.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases/tag/1.46.0>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

It is possible to use **jinja2** template engine for *global.conf*. When Conan loads this file, immediately parses
and renders the template, which must result in a standard tools-configuration text.

  .. code:: jinja

     # Using all the cores automatically
     tools.build:jobs={{os.cpu_count()}}
     # Using the current OS
     user.myconf.system:name = {{platform.system()}}

> .. note::
> 
>     The Python packages passed to render the template are ``os`` and ``platform`` for all platforms and ``distro`` in Linux platforms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Python packages passed to render the template are ``os`` and ``platform`` for all platforms and ``distro`` in Linux platforms.
```
Not worth a note, not that relevant, normal text is maybe ok?

Configuration data types
------------------------

> Available since: `1.46.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases/tag/1.46.0>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

All the values will be interpreted by Conan as the result of the python built-in `eval()` function:

.. code-block:: text

    # String
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:verbosity=Diagnostic
    # Boolean
    tools.system.package_manager:sudo=True
    # Integer
    tools.microsoft.msbuild:max_cpu_count=2
    # List of values
    user.myconf.build:ldflags=["--flag1", "--flag2"]
    # Dictionary
    tools.microsoft.msbuildtoolchain:compile_options={"ExceptionHandling": "Async"}

Configuration data operators
----------------------------

> Available since: `1.46.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases/tag/1.46.0>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

It's also possible to use some extra operators when you're composing tool configurations in your *global.conf* or
any of your profiles:

* ``+=`` == ``append``: appends values at the end of the existing value (only for lists).
* ``=+`` == ``prepend``: puts values at the beginning of the existing value (only for lists).
* ``=!`` == ``unset``: gets rid of any configuration value.

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: *myprofile*

    [settings]
    ...

    [conf]
    # Define the value => ["-f1"]
    user.myconf.build:flags=["-f1"]

    # Append the value ["-f2"] => ["-f1", "-f2"]
    user.myconf.build:flags+=["-f2"]

    # Prepend the value ["-f0"] => ["-f0", "-f1", "-f2"]
    user.myconf.build:flags=+["-f0"]

    # Unset the value
    user.myconf.build:flags=!

> Configuration in your profiles

Reviewer 3: Maybe move this section to the "profiles" section, and link it from here.

Author: Let's do it when adding the `profiles` section.

    [conf]
    user.myconf.build:cflags=!
    user.myconf.build:ldflags=['--prefix prefix-value', '--flag1 value1', '--flag2 value2']
    ...

Configuration patterns
----------------------

You can use package patterns to apply the configuration in those dependencies which are matching:

.. code-block:: text

    *:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Ninja
    zlib:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Visual Studio 16 2019

This example shows you how to specify a general `generator` for all your packages, but for `zlib` one. `zlib` is defining
`Visual Studio 16 2019` as its own generator.

Besides that, it's quite relevant to say that **the order matters**. So, if we change the order of the
configuration lines above:

.. code-block:: text

    zlib:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Visual Studio 16 2019
    *:tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=Ninja

The result is that you're specifying a general `generator` for all your packages, and that's it. The `zlib` line has no
effect because it's the first one evaluated, and after that, Conan is overriding that specific pattern with the most
general one, so it deserves to pay special attention to the order.

.. _conf_in_recipes:

> Configuration in your recipes

Reviewer 3: Not belonging here?

            # Getting values and ensuring the gotten type is the passed one otherwise an exception will be raised
            self.conf_info.get("tools.system.package_manager:sudo", check_type=bool)  # == True
            self.conf_info.get("tools.system.package_manager:sudo", check_type=int)  # ERROR! It raises a ConanException
            # Modifying configuration list-like values
            self.conf_info.append("user.myconf.build:ldflags", "--flag3")  # == ["--flag1", "--flag2", "--flag3"]
            self.conf_info.prepend("user.myconf.build:ldflags", "--flag0")  # == ["--flag0", "--flag1", "--flag2", "--flag3"]
            # Modifying configuration dict-like values
            self.conf_info.update("tools.microsoft.msbuildtoolchain:compile_options", {"ExpandAttributedSource": "false"})
            # Unset any value
            self.conf_info.unset("tools.microsoft.msbuildtoolchain:compile_options")
            # Remove
            self.conf_info.remove("user.myconf.build:ldflags", "--flag1")  # == ["--flag0", "--flag2", "--flag3"]
            # Removing completely the configuration
            self.conf_info.pop("tools.system.package_manager:sudo")

> .. important::
> 
>     Legacy configuration methods to set/get values like ``self.conf_info["xxxxx"] = "yyyyy"`` and ``v = self.conf_info["xxxxx"]`` are
>     deprecated since Conan 1.46 version. Use ``self.conf_info.define("xxxxx", "yyyyy")`` and ``v = self.conf_info.get("xxxxx")`` instead
>     like the example above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Configuration from build_requires

Reviewer 3: Same, this is not global.conf reference?
